.. _modelgrids:

***********************
Downloading model grids
***********************



Sonora
======

Currently we only support the 2018 Sonora Model grids.  In a web browser, navigate to the `Sonora 2018 Zenodo website <https://zenodo.org/record/1309035#.YafR7oDML9A>`_.  Click on the ``Download`` button next to ``spectra.tar     1.2 GB``.  That will download the ``spectra.tar`` file to wherever you've chosen to download the spectra.  Then you want to untar ``spectra.tar``.  The pattern should look something like below, depending on what your operating system defaults are, so copying and pasting this code is not likely to work--- take it step by step. ``~/libraries/raw/Sonora`` can be replaced with wherever you want the spectral models to live long-term, but our examples here continue to use that pattern.  ::

    tar -xzvf spectra.tar
    mv spectra ~/libraries/raw/Sonora
    
The end result should look something like this: ::

    $ ls ~/libraries/raw/Sonora/
                [...]
    sp_t2100g3160nc_m0.0.gz  sp_t450g316nc_m0.0.gz    sp_t950g31nc_m0.0.gz
    sp_t2100g316nc_m0.0.gz   sp_t450g31nc_m0.0.gz     sp_t950g562nc_m0.0.gz
    sp_t2100g31nc_m0.0.gz    sp_t450g562nc_m0.0.gz    sp_t950g56nc_m0.0.gz
                [...]

Due to the way the Sonora models are packaged, models with solar metallicity end in the ``.gz`` file extension, while other models have no file extension. Confirm that this is the case in your system. We know that this is somewhat inconsistent and are looking into ways to repackage model grids for express ``gollum`` usage in the future.


PHOENIX
=======


.. note::

    Downloading all the PHOENIX models can take a ridiculous amount of time. Start the downloading as soon as you can!

The PHOENIX models total over 100 GB, and generally download at a relatively slow bandwidth.  The files are arranged into sub-directories for metallicity and alpha-element abundance.

You can get all of the PHOENIX models in one-fell-swoop from the command line if you have ``wget``. Replace ``~/Downloads`` with wherever you want to download the models to. ::

    cd ~/Downloads
    wget -r -l 0 ftp://phoenix.astro.physik.uni-goettingen.de/HiResFITS/

If you don't have ``wget`` on your computer, please help ``gollum`` grow by filing a GitHub Issue with how you resolved the problem, or what problems you are encountering.

As noted, this process will take a while as each individual file is painstakingly downloaded from a single German computer. The commandline script, as written, will preserve the directory structure--- that's good! The ``gollum code`` demands that the directory structure is preserved. Once it's all downloaded it should look like this ::

    # From inside this directory: ~/Downloads/phoenix.astro.physik.uni-goettingen.de/
    $ tree 
    .
    └── HiResFITS
        ├── PHOENIX-ACES-AGSS-COND-2011
        │   └── Z-0.0
        │       ├── lte02300-0.00-0.0.PHOENIX-ACES-AGSS-COND-2011-HiRes.fits
        │       ├── lte02300-0.50-0.0.PHOENIX-ACES-AGSS-COND-2011-HiRes.fits
        │       ├── lte02300-1.00-0.0.PHOENIX-ACES-AGSS-COND-2011-HiRes.fits
        │       ├── lte02300-1.50-0.0.PHOENIX-ACES-AGSS-COND-2011-HiRes.fits
                                        [ ... ]
        │       ├── lte04000-2.50-0.0.PHOENIX-ACES-AGSS-COND-2011-HiRes.fits
        │       ├── lte04000-3.00-0.0.PHOENIX-ACES-AGSS-COND-2011-HiRes.fits
        │       └── lte04000-3.50-0.0.PHOENIX-ACES-AGSS-COND-2011-HiRes.fits
        │                                [ ... ]
        │    ├── Z-0.0
        │    ├── Z+0.5
        │    ├── Z-0.5
        │    ├── Z+1.0
        │    ├── Z-1.0
        │    ├── Z-1.5
        │    ├── Z-2.0
        │    ├── Z-3.0
        │    └── Z-4.0
        └── WAVE_PHOENIX-ACES-AGSS-COND-2011.fits

You can set user defaults for paths for each model grid. First, go into ``gollum``'s source directory and look for a file called ``config.env`` (NOT ``config_template.env``, do not edit this file!). If it doesn't exist, then run the following: ::

    cp config_template.env config.env

Now with ``config.env`` generated, you can edit it. Change the key corresponding to the model grid whose path you want to edit. Then save the file, and from then on gollum will know to automatically look there for that model grid.
In the examples shown above, you would want to update the ``PHOENIX`` key to "~/Downloads/phoenix.astro.physik.uni-goettingen.de/HiResFITS/", and the ``SonoraB`` key to "~/libraries/raw/Sonora/", and ``gollum`` should be ready to go!

